They sat on the dresser like anything
I put in my pocket before leaving
The house. I even saw a few tiny ones
Tilted against the window of my living
Room, little metal threats with splinters
For handles. They leaned like those
Teenage boys at the corner who might
Not be teenage boys because they ask
For dollars in the middle
Of the April day and because they knock
At 10 a.m. Do I need help lifting some-
Thing heavy? Yard work? I wondered
If only I saw the hammers. The teenage
Boys visiting seemed not to care that
They lay on the floor lit by the TV.
I'd have covered them up with rugs,
With dry towels and linen, but their claw
And sledge and ball-peen heads shone
In the dark, which is, at least, a view
In the dark. And their handles meant
My hands, striking surfaces, getting
Shelves up, finally. One stayed
In my tub, slowing the drain. I found
Another propped near the bulb
In the refrigerator. Wasn't I hungry?
Why have them there if I could not
Use them, if I could not look at my own
Reflection in the mirror and take one
To the temple and knock myself out?
I spent what light Saturday sent sweating
And learned to cuss cutting grass for women
Kind enough to say they couldn't tell the damned
Difference between their mowed lawns
And their vacuumed carpets just before
Handing over a five-dollar bill rolled tighter
Than a joint and asking me in to change
A few light bulbs. I called those women old
Because they wouldn't move out of a chair
Without my help or walk without a hand
At the base of their backs. I called them
Old, and they must have been; they're all dead
Now, dead and in the earth I once tended.
The loneliest people have the earth to love
And not one friend their own age—only
Mothers to baby them and big sisters to boss
Them around, women they want to please
And pray for the chance to say please to.
I don't do that kind of work anymore. My job
Is to look at the childhood I hated and say
I once had something to do with my hands.
Peace on this planet
Or guns glowing hot,
We lay there together
As if we were getting
Something done.  It
Felt like planting
A garden or planning
A meal for a people
Who still need feeding,
All that touching or
Barely touching, not
Saying much, not adding
Anything.  The cushion
Of it, the skin and
Occasional sigh, all
Seemed like work worth
Mastering. I’m sure
Somebody died while
We made love.  Some-
Body killed somebody
Black.  I thought then
Of holding you
As a political act.  I
May as well have
Held myself.  We didn’t
Stand for one thought,
Didn’t do a damn thing,
And though you left
Me, I’m glad we didn’t.
I begin with love, hoping to end there.
I don’t want to leave a messy corpse.

I don’t want to leave a messy corpse
Full of medicines that turn in the sun.

Some of my medicines turn in the sun.
Some of us don’t need hell to be good.

Those who need most, need hell to be good.
What are the symptoms of your sickness?

Here is one symptom of my sickness:
Men who love me are men who miss me.

Men who leave me are men who miss me
In the dream where I am an island.

In the dream where I am an island,
I grow green with hope.  I’d like to end there.
I will not shoot myself
In the head, and I will not shoot myself
In the back, and I will not hang myself
With a trashbag, and if I do,
I promise you, I will not do it
In a police car while handcuffed
Or in the jail cell of a town
I only know the name of
Because I have to drive through it
To get home.  Yes, I may be at risk,
But I promise you, I trust the maggots
Who live beneath the floorboards
Of my house to do what they must
To any carcass more than I trust
An officer of the law of the land
To shut my eyes like a man
Of God might, or to cover me with a sheet
So clean my mother could have used it
To tuck me in.  When I kill me, I will
Do it the same way most Americans do,
I promise you:  cigarette smoke
Or a piece of meat on which I choke
Or so broke I freeze
In one of these winters we keep
Calling worst.  I promise if you hear
Of me dead anywhere near
A cop, then that cop killed me.  He took
Me from us and left my body, which is,
No matter what we’ve been taught,
Greater than the settlement a city can pay
A mother to stop crying, and more
Beautiful than the new bullet
Fished from the folds of my brain.
I don’t want to hurt a man, but I like to hear one beg. 
Two people touch twice a month in ten hotels, and
We call it long distance.  He holds down one coast. 
I wander the other like any African American, Africa
With its condition and America with its condition
And black folk born in this nation content to carry
Half of each.  I shoulder my share.  My man flies
To touch me.  Sky on our side.  Sky above his world
I wish to write.  Which is where I go wrong.  Words
Are a sense of sound.  I get smart.  My mother shakes
Her head.  My grandmother sighs:  He ain’t got no
Sense.  My grandmother is dead.  She lives with me. 
I hear my mother shake her head over the phone. 
Somebody cut the cord.  We have a long-distance
Relationship.  I lost half of her to a stroke.  God gives
To each a body.  God gives every body its pains. 
When pain mounts in my body, I try thinking
Of my white forefathers who hurt their black bastards
Quite legally.  I hate to say it, but one pain can ease
Another.  Doctors rather I take pills.  My man wants me
To see a doctor.  What are you when you leave your man
Wanting?  What am I now that I think so fondly
Of airplanes?  What’s my name, whose is it, while we
Make love.  My lover leaves me with words I wish
To write.  Flies from one side of a nation to the outside
Of our world.  I don’t want the world.  I only want
African sense of American sound.  Him.  Touching. 
This body.  Aware of its pains.  Greetings, Earthlings. 
My name is Slow And Stumbling.  I come from planet
Trouble.  I am here to love you uncomfortable. 